Hey, CanAxis Church, so good to be with you today.
I want to share with you three numbers from a survey that was recently done in Canada.
The first number will not be surprising.
The second one might be a little.
The third one, I think you'll be as surprised as I was when I saw it.
First number is 100.
100 is the percentage of people who identified as religious in this survey who pray at least once a month.
So a hundred percent of the people who in this survey said, yes, I'm part of some religion or religious in some way, a hundred percent of them say I pray at least once a month.
Second number, 18, 18% or one in five rounding up.
These are people who of the people who said they're not religious and don't identify with any religion in particular, one in five of them roughly still said, yep, I pray once a month.
And then this one too.
2% of the people who say, I don't believe in any higher power in any divine being or any kind of faith, 2% of them still pray once a month.
It tells me that prayer is one of the most instinctive things that we do.
Whether it's throwing up Hail Mary or thank you, sorry, please.
There's an instinctive bent towards turning our eyes upward in a sense and offering up some kind of prayer.
And we have prayer language kind of in our everyday sports vernacular and life.
It seems to be one of the most intuitive instinctive things that people do.
And yet, I mean, if you're anything like me, maybe I'm the only one, prayer is complicated too.
It's one of the most unnatural things.
And let me share with you why I say that in my kind of up and down prayer journey over the years.
Sometimes I feel like, uh, if you just feel guilty about it, oh man, I should pray more.
Right.
Like I'll talk to someone in church and they'll be like, I was praying for you.
And I'm like, dang, I was not praying for you.
Uh, you know, or I was praying yesterday and I'm like, I wasn't praying yesterday.
Like I, I just, I don't know about you.
I often felt like, Oh, I should pray more.
I feel prayer was something I felt guilty about cause I didn't do it.
Sometimes I felt like the logic of it defeats me.
Like, God knows everything, doesn't he?
He kind of knows my thoughts.
Why does, like, if I'm saying something, he already knows what I'm saying.
So what's the point of saying it?
Sometimes I felt like I ran out of words.
Like, I've prayed about this for this person or this situation so many times, I have nothing else to say.
Or I ran out of focus, you know?
I start praying and then the prayer turns to thinking and then the thinking turns to mind wandering and then I'm
falling asleep or something.
I lack focus or sometimes I lack words.
And then if I'm honest, over time, sometimes I felt disappointed in prayer, disappointed with prayer, disappointed with God.
for something that wasn't answered or that God didn't seem to be paying attention to in some way.
And maybe I'm the only one, but I don't, at least in the conversations I've had with people in my church, these are some of the challenges.
So there's this weird dynamic where prayer is so instinctive, so natural and we think to do it, even people who don't even believe in a higher power of divine being, still some of them would pray.
And yet there's a complexity and a difficulty to it.
And so here's what I've realized.
We need a place to learn, to wrestle with prayer.
Maybe you're new to faith, maybe you're exploring faith, maybe you're just someone who's like, oh no, I'm a person of faith, but the prayer thing has always been a bit of a black box for me.
We need a place where we can learn and experiment and grow.
I don't think anyone ever arrives.
There aren't people who are just, they're just amazing prayers.
I know there are people who pray, and I love being with them and having them pray for me, but we're always learning to pray
because prayer is about communication and growing in our relationship with God.
And if you're someone that wants to grow in your relationship with God or maybe you're here and you're exploring faith and you're not, I didn't know that's what that was.
Yeah, it's a relationship.
And any significant relationship in your life you know is based on communication.
And if that communication isn't growing, it's shrinking, it's receding.
We're either growing closer to the people in our lives or further away that tends not to be neutral.
And I think prayer is one of those things we need to grow in so that we can continue to grow in relationship with God.
But we need a place and a space to do that.
Like a lab.
In a lab, like if I put the word lab after prayer,
That changes it, right?
You're like, oh, in a lab, you try stuff.
In a lab, you experiment in things.
In a lab, you learn and grow.
And so over these next few weeks, Jeff and I talked about this and I said, hey, I'd love to do this kind of prayer lab in your church over the next couple of weeks where we are learning and experimenting with how to pray or how to pray in different ways.
For some of you, maybe that have never prayed before or maybe it's been like a thousand false starts because of all the reasons I mentioned to you.
And even for many of us that say, yeah, I've prayed for many years,
But I still wrestle with disappointment or running out of words or the logic defeats me or whatever it is that we're going to have the next few weeks to actually try some stuff that I'm not just going to teach you about it.
Then we're going to actually try it in our time together.
And really what I want to do over these next few weeks is share with you what has been game changers for me in my prayer life, things that have really helped me break through some of the struggles.
And it's still up and down, but stuff that I'd say, yeah, no, I've grown.
This has really helped.
I want to just share that with you.
So where do we begin with the lab?
Like, where do you start?
I thought maybe no better place to start than in a conversation that Jesus had with his first followers.
And they said to him, Lord, can you teach us how to pray?
Help us pray.
Maybe they had experienced the same things we have in terms of our struggle with prayer.
And so they said, Jesus, teach us how to pray.
And in response to that question or to that ask, he gave them what has become known as the Lord's prayer.
or some of you maybe grew up in traditions where it's called the Our Father.
What's interesting about it is this was a prayer that Jesus actually gave when he said, oh, this is how to pray.
And maybe you kind of know how it begins, right?
Our Father who art in heaven.
The thing is that I found with that prayer, some of us maybe learned it.
Some of us maybe grew up reading it or saying it a lot every day, maybe or every day in school.
is that it actually didn't have the effect of bringing us closer in our relationship with God.
I felt like in some ways it pushed us away from God.
And here's what I mean.
The opening lines of the prayer.
Right?
It sounds very formal.
It's like language that's from the 16th century.
And, you know, when people said, oh, I can't believe they took prayers out of school.
We used to pray to our fathers.
Like, the prayer wasn't in school.
It was in the 16th century.
It was used language that we don't use every day.
Our father who art in heaven.
In other words, a long way away from here.
You're way up there in heaven.
And then the next line, hallowed be thy name.
What does that even mean?
I heard some kid praying, hallowed be thy name.
What does hallowed mean?
Thy kingdom come.
There's the thighs again.
the word kingdom.
What's that?
That sounds like Game of Thrones or some days of yesteryear.
That's not my everyday life.
Thy will be done on earth as in heaven.
Yeah, this is just God.
This is your will.
You know, God's gonna do what God's gonna do.
Give us this day our daily bread.
Daily bread.
Is that a food bank?
What is that?
You know, deliver us from evil or whatever.
Like for you are trespasses and like trespasses as a kid.
I was like,
I trespass every day on the way to school.
Am I supposed to confess that?
I jumped Mr. Wilson's fence and took the shortcut.
That's my trespass.
I guess I should confess that.
That's what God wants me to do.
The whole thing didn't feel like it was a prayer for my everyday life.
We even wrapped in language.
I don't use these and those and those.
That's not how I speak.
In many ways, that prayer didn't have the effect in my life of bringing me closer to God.
I talked to many people in our church who said, yeah, we just prayed it.
It was just kind of, I wasn't thinking about it.
We, we had to just say it.
It was like, yeah, we sing O Canada and we have to say this thing.
And so it was rote.
We memorized it.
We just mailed the words and we had to pray it.
It was like demanded from us, which usually doesn't lead to closeness in relationship.
When someone's saying these are the words, memorize them, say them every day.
Oh, don't we feel so close?
No, but here's the thing.
Jesus gave us these words to help us learn how to pray.
And the actual words?
but also that the words give us a sense of like, you could pray like this, these kinds of prayers.
So this Lord's prayer is actually super helpful for us, but we need to recapture it, I think in everyday language and understand what Jesus was actually teaching them.
So this can be something that can help us when we run out of words, when we feel stuck, when the logic of prayer defeats us, maybe even when we feel a little bit distracted or disappointed.
So I'm gonna read it for us actually in a translation that's not from the 16th century, one that's from the 21st century.
And I'm gonna say this, and maybe this is very obvious, but I think it's helpful.
When we read scripture, we're reading translations.
So the words of the Lord's Prayer that we're about to read, Jesus first spoke them in Aramaic.
Like that was the language used.
They weren't written down at the time.
Only 17% of the world roughly was that time around Jesus was literate.
So most people just spoke and things were spoken and repeated and memorized and spoken to other people.
It was an oral tradition.
That's how information was passed around and stories were passed around and prayers were passed around.
So Jesus first spoke it in Aramaic.
Then Luke who was a Greek wrote it down in Greek.
That's the version we're going to read.
And then that Greek original language was translated into
the many English translations we have.
So Jesus never said, our Father who art in heaven.
He said something else in Aramaic.
And we want to capture what was he saying?
What were the actual words and what were the words trying to convey to us?
And so I want to read it for you because this prayer is a game changer for us to learn to pray.
So here's what I'm reading in Luke chapter 11, and I'm reading in what's called the message translation, which is an everyday language, 21st century translation written by the late Eugene Peterson, translated from the original Greek manuscripts.
One day, he, that's Jesus, was praying in a certain place.
When he finished, one of his disciples said, Master, teach us to pray just as John, the Baptist, taught his disciples.
So Jesus said, when you pray, say.
Father, reveal who you are.
Set the world right.
Keep us alive with three square meals.
Keep us forgiven with you and forgiving others.
Keep us safe from ourselves and the devil.
Then he said, imagine what would happen if you went to a friend in the middle of the night and said, friend, lend me three loaves of bread.
An old friend traveling through just showed up and I don't have a thing on hand.
The friend answers from his bed.
Don't bother me.
The door is locked.
My children are all down for the night.
I can't get up to give you anything.
But let me tell you, even if he won't get up because he's a friend, if you stand your ground knocking and waking all the neighbors, he'll finally get up and get you whatever you need.
Here's what I'm saying.
Ask and you'll get.
Seek and you'll find.
Knock and the door will be open.
Don't bargain with God.
Be direct.
Ask for what you need.
This is not a cat and mouse hide-and-seek game we're in.
If your little boy asks you for a serving of fish, do you scare him with a live snake on his plate?
Rhetorical question, answer, no.
If your little girl asks for an egg, do you trick her with a spider?
As bad as you are, you wouldn't think of such a thing.
You're at least decent to your own children.
And don't you think when the father who conceived you in love will give you the Holy Spirit when you ask him?
What is this prayer?
And maybe even as reading it in that translation, maybe you've never read that translation, you're like, well, that sounds, it doesn't even sound like the Lord's prayer or the our father that I learned or I didn't know any of that was written in scripture.
It's telling us something in the actual words that these are words we can pray, but it's also telling us in general, this is one of the ways to try praying.
I think the very first thing that it tells us is prayer is primarily relational.
not transactional.
In other words, prayer is not primarily about getting stuff from God.
God is not sort of a genie or a jukebox that we have to say the right spell and push the right buttons and put in enough money, and then God will give us what we want.
Prayer is relational.
And that's why he begins with, and even the words themselves and the teaching around it, saying, you're talking to a God who is a good father and a faithful friend.
Right?
The opening words of the prayer are father.
They're relational.
That's not information.
It's God's, it's Jesus saying, remember, you're talking to a father.
And the opening, that word father is actually better, you know, sometimes you'll say, oh, father, feel so formal.
The best translation of the Aramaic word that was used is this, dad, dad.
That's how Jesus says, open your prayer.
I, I'm a father.
I have four kids and I have heard that word dad many times.
You know what I've heard it?
Dad in the middle of the night when they were little and they were calling for a glass of water for the 10th time or they were sick.
And sometimes I would say to my wife, I'm pretty sure I heard them say mom.
No, no, dad, right?
They needed something and they were scared or they just, they were, they needed help.
Dad, when they burst in through the door because they're excited to tell me something.
Dad, when they're running down the street and we're playing street football and they're like, you know, it's a post-trout.
Throw me, I have a football in their hand.
They're calling for the ball.
We're playing.
It's a word of play and affection.
Dad, they would say, when we were fighting, when they were frustrated with me, we were butting heads on something.
Dad, like, dad, they would spam me.
They spam text me now.
Dad, dad, dad, dad, dad.
Where are you?
You're not paying attention.
And it's some emergency like, where are the chips?
This is a term of affection and deermate.
And Jesus says, this is how we should pray.
Dad!
Because you're talking to a God who is a good father and a faithful friend.
In other words, it's like every word that comes after that is the prayer, but the opening address is, this is relational activity.
This is connecting to a God who is good and faithful and loving.
And when he says,
our father who art in heaven or our father in heaven.
He's not telling us where God is like he's way up there in heaven.
It's the kind of father that he is.
And actually it's better translated the way Jesus talked about it a lot is your heavenly father.
In other words, this is a father from heaven.
It's not where God is.
It's where he's from.
In other words, he's not like any other father in the world.
Your father in heaven is unique.
Even if you had a great dad and you feel affection and closeness and your dad was always there for you, he's better than the best father.
He's a father in heaven.
He's not like any other earthly father you've ever known.
Or if you didn't have a father growing up or your relationship with your dad is complicated or was messy or he was not faithful or loving or kind or close.
God, your Heavenly Father is so different.
Our Father from heaven, our heavenly dad, Jesus says this is how you begin to pray.
And so I thought we'd just take a moment and I'm going to put the words on screen for you and let's read it out loud together.
Whether this is the first time you've read it, first time you've read this translation, maybe it's the first time you've ever read scripture to feel this as in light of like this is relational.
I'm talking to a good,
Father, better than the best father, more faithful and loving than the best friend.
And so let's read this together in this translation.
Now I'll read it slow and you can just track with me.
Father, reveal who you are.
Set the world right.
Keep us alive with three square meals.
Keep us forgiven with you and forgiving others.
Keep us safe from ourselves and the devil.
This prayer that we just prayed is about bringing, in a sense, us close to God and God close to us, bringing earth close to heaven and heaven close to earth.
That's why Jesus says, remember, this is who God is.
And I want to read that prayer for you and add in my own commentary because it isn't just the words we prayed, but these words mean something and they help us understand these are all the different kinds of things you can pray.
You can literally borrow these words, but this is what it's meaning when you pray.
Father, you are so good, better than the best dad, more faithful than the best friend.
That's a prayer.
This is who you are.
Reveal who you are, God.
Why?
Because the world needs to know you more.
God, the world thinks that you're angry.
The world thinks that you're judgmental.
The world thinks that you're distant.
The world doesn't know what a loving, faithful, good, close, sacrificing father you are.
God, reveal who you are.
Show the world who you really are, because there's so many distorted pictures of who you are.
They need to know what you're really like.
Then the next line, set the world right.
Why?
Because earth needs to look more like heaven.
Earth needs to look more like Eden.
God, we know this world isn't the way it's supposed to be.
Not my world in here, not me, not the world out there.
Can you make it a little more right?
Can you make this right?
Can you make this good?
Can you make this the way you created it to be?
Set the world right.
That's what that means.
Keep us alive with three square meals.
Why?
Because we have daily needs.
God, we have daily needs and you know them.
And sometimes we think we're the ones meeting our daily needs, but we really know, especially when we can't, oh my gosh, I'm dependent on you for everything.
For the air I breathe and the food that I eat and jobs and health and all that stuff.
God, keep us alive with three squirrel meals because we have daily needs.
So we're praying daily for God to help us with those needs.
Keep us forgiven with you and forgiving others.
Why?
Because we have daily hurts.
God.
This world, we hurt each other, even the ones closest to us.
Keep us forgiven with you.
Forgive us for the things we've done.
Keep us and help us to forgive others.
That's about the daily hurts that we sustain in this world.
We don't just need daily bread, we need daily forgiveness.
And then keep us safe from ourselves and the devil.
Why?
Because we have daily battles.
God, this world is a battle.
And I am in a battle.
There's a battle sometimes in my mind, in my heart, or with other people, or certainly in this world.
There's lots of conflict.
God, we have daily battles, so help us.
Help us know what's true, help us not to believe lies about ourselves, about each other, about God, and all of this stuff, because we have daily battles, not just daily bread, not just daily forgiveness, but we have a daily battle and we need you to keep us from temptation and help us in that.
That's what this prayer means.
And then lastly, the last thing we know is God always answers prayer.
You're like, BJ, that is not true.
I have a long list of stuff that God hasn't answered and fair enough, I do too.
There are a lot of things that I'm still waiting on from God to answer or I feel like the answer was no or not now or whatever.
What do I mean by that?
Jesus actually tells us that there is one particular prayer that the father, the good father will always answer.
Yes.
Look what he says in verse 13.
Don't you think the father who conceived you in love will give
the Holy Spirit when you ask Him.
This is the prayer that God will always answer.
Jesus says, God is a good Father, and you, if you're a parent, you're not perfect, but you know how to give good gifts when your children ask.
How much more our perfect Heavenly Father will give you the Holy Spirit when you ask.
What is the Holy Spirit?
The Holy Spirit is the presence of Jesus with you, in you, right here.
right now.
And what Jesus is saying is, the prayer that is always answered is not one of transaction, but one of relationship.
This relationship prayer, Father, give me more of your presence.
I need you with me here right now.
I need to know that you are here.
God, fill me up.
I don't want to do this alone.
I can't do this alone.
I can't walk through this alone.
I can't have this conversation without you.
I need to know you're here.
Jesus says that's the prayer that will always be answered.
Father, give me more of your presence.
It's a prayer of relationship, not of transaction.
So I thought we'd end this time just giving you an opportunity.
Remember, we're doing prayer lab stuff.
We're just talking about this and then we're going to try it.
And I want you to try this at home, but let's try it here before we try it at home.
I'm going to walk you through this prayer again and give you space in each line just to personalize it.
Remember, it's not just the words themselves.
Jesus is talking about interpersonal relationships between a child and a father.
or friends who are so faithful and so close.
So we need to personalize to go, this is how I'm meant to relate to dad.
Dad, this is what I need.
So I'm going to read it slowly and give you time, some prompts just to in your mind.
And if you want, you can close your eyes if that helps, if that keeps you from distraction.
I would, if you have a phone or a journal that you use to take notes, in fact, I'd encourage you all the way through this prayer lab series to have something you're taking notes with.
I know that's helpful for me, helps me remember, helps me stay focused when I journal.
And so you can write this stuff down through the prompts as I'm leading you as what's coming to mind, what you're wanting to pray.
Writing prayers is a really effective way of staying focused and actually being able to personalize and say, no, this is what I want to say.
And so I'm going to walk you through this and give you a chance to pray this right here.
And this is just in your head and your heart and write it down if it'll be helpful for you.
Father, dad, you are so good, better than the best dad, more faithful than the best friend.
Let's take a moment to remember and rehearse God's goodness to you, to remind yourself in any way that you've forgotten that he's good.
You might want to list things you're thankful for or just say, God, you are good.
Thank you.
The next line in the prayer says, reveal who you are because the world needs to know you more.
Take a moment now to pray for someone who really needs to know who God really is.
Someone who needs to meet Jesus.
In Jesus, we find out who God really is.
I mean, maybe that's you.
Maybe you're going to pray for yourself, or maybe it's just someone in your life, like God, show them who you really are.
Just take a moment, write or say a prayer for them.
You can literally borrow these words.
God, reveal who you are to so and so because they really need to know who you are.
The next verse says, set the world right because earth needs to look more like heaven.
Pray for an area in our world that needs healing, restoration, provision, justice, or new life.
Like something that is broken or hurting or fractured that you're sent God, can you set this right?
It may be a world issue.
It may be something going on in your family, your neighborhood, your work, your health, someone you know.
Just take a minute.
Ask God to set that right.
The next line says, keep us alive with three square meals because we have daily needs.
Ask him to meet a practical need that you have or that a loved one has.
for says keep us forgiven with you and forgiving others because we have daily hurts.
Take a moment to confess anything that you need forgiveness for or ask his help in forgiving someone that's hurt you.
We need his help to be able to do that.
us safe from ourselves and the devil because we have daily battles.
This is a chance to ask him to protect you from maybe your own bad, faulty decisions or thinking, some of the lies you say to yourself, or to give you truth to combat the lies of the evil one.
That's the primary way Satan works in our lives.
It's just through lies.
And so you ask God to teach you truth and protect you from lies.
Then just take a moment to end your prayer with asking for the thing that Jesus says God will always answer.
Just this simple prayer, God, give me more of your presence in my life.
encourage you to use this prayer this week.
It's kind of your homework.
Take this lab work home.
Pray it if you have a small group this week.
If you're hanging out with friends or maybe before a meal this week or just calling up somebody who you know has a daily need or is going through a daily battle or someone that you need to forgive, whatever it is, you can pray that with and for somebody else.
And I want to
pray that that makes prayer alive for the first time or for the first time again in your life.
As we wrap this, I wanted to just pray a blessing over you, because I recognize that this whole thing is contingent on how we see God as Father, that we're Dad.
Maybe for some of you, you can totally relate to a closeness in a relationship with your Dad, but I want to pray a blessing
Over those of you who maybe your relationship with your dad is complicated, maybe you've lost him.
He's not close to you, or maybe he's passed away, or maybe you're just like, yeah, I did not get a good picture of what a dad or father is.
I want to bless you in this year ahead with healing for that mental picture of what it means to have a good, good father in heaven.
I want to bless you with a perseverance and a willingness to trust that God is like no other earthly father you've ever known.
And I want to bless you with an experience of his closeness, his love, his gentleness, and his faithfulness that will make it a little bit easier for you to start your prayers with the word
God, we just pray that you would do that for us.
We all need a better, clearer, truer picture of who you are, that you are better than the best father, more faithful than the best friend.
So we ask that you would reveal who you are to us, not just in our minds, stuff we know about you.
but in our hearts, what we really believe about you, that we would be able to experience your love a little more.
In Jesus' name, amen.